ISA proposals/Huawei/16bit_encodings.adoc, before:

= RISC-V 16-bit code-size reduction extension proposal
Version 0.1
:doctype: book
:encoding: utf-8
:lang: en
:toc: left
:toclevels: 4
:numbered:
:xrefstyle: short
:le: &#8804;
:rarr: &#8658;

This document describes 16-bit instructions proposed to help reduce code-size.

== Rational

16-bit instructions are highly valuable for code-size reduction

=== Opcode Assignment

[#proposed-16bit-encodings]
.proposed 16-bit encodings 
[width="100%",options=header]

|=============================================================================================
| 15 | 14 | 13 | 12 | 11 | 10 | 9 | 8 | 7 | 6  | 5  | 4 | 3 | 2 | 1 | 0 |instruction         
17+|PUSH/POP/POPRET specifications are mature
17+|`rcount` must be in the range 0 to 10 to decode as these instructions
3+|  100       | 1  | 1  4+|rcount (0,10) | 0  | 0  3+| spimm   2+| 00  | C.POP[.E]
3+|  100       | 1  | 1  4+|rcount (0,10) | 0  | 1  3+| spimm   2+| 00  | C.POPRET[.E]
3+|  100       | 1  | 1  4+|rcount (0,10) | 1  | 0  3+| spimm   2+| 00  | C.PUSH[.E]
17+|PUSHZERO spec is less mature than PUSH/POP/POPRET and the benefit is lower
3+|  100       | 1  | 1  4+|rcount (0,10) | 1  | 1  3+| spimm   2+| 00  | C.PUSHZERO[.E]             
3+|  100       | 1  | 1  4+| 1011       5+|                     2+| 00  | *reserved*
3+|  100       | 1  | 1  2+| 11 7+|                             2+| 00  | *reserved*
17+|Single source/dest with room for 4 more encodings
3+|  100       | 1  | 0  | 0 3+| rs1'/rd' | 0  | 0  3+| 000     2+| 00  | C.ZEXT.B
3+|  100       | 1  | 0  | 0 3+| rs1'/rd' | 0  | 1  3+| 001     2+| 00  | C.ZEXT.H
3+|  100       | 1  | 0  | 0 3+| rs1'/rd' | 1  | 0  3+| 010     2+| 00  | C.ZEXT.B
3+|  100       | 1  | 0  | 0 3+| rs1'/rd' | 1  | 1  3+| 011     2+| 00  | C.ZEXT.H
3+|  100       | 1  | 0  | 0 3+|          | 1  | 1    | 1 2+|   2+| 00  | *reserved*
17+|source/dest with one other source operand
3+|  100       | 1  | 0  | 1 3+| rs1'/rd' | 0  | 0  3+| rs2'    2+| 00  | C.MUL
3+|  100       | 1  | 0  | 1 3+| rs1'/rd' | 0  | 1  3+| rs2'    2+| 00  | C.ORSLL8
3+|  100       | 1  | 0  | 1 3+| rs1'/rd' | 1  | 0  3+| rs2'    2+| 00  | C.ORSLL16
3+|  100       | 1  | 0  | 1 3+| rs1'/rd' | 1  | 1  3+| rs2'    2+| 00  | C.ORSLL24
17+|To be useful C.RORI needs a 5-bit immediate, so it may be too expensive to encode, TBD
3+|  100       | 0  | 0  | 0 3+| rs1'/rd' 5+|       shamt       2+| 00  | C.RORI (0-31 places)
3+|  100       | 0  | 0  | 0 3+| rs1'/rd' 2+| 00    3+| imm     2+| 00  | C.XORI (-4 to +3)
3+|  100       | 0  | 0  | 0 3+| rs1'/rd' 2+| > 1   3+| imm     2+| 00  | *reserved*
17+|PC relative load, only available for RV32 as this encoding is C.SLLI with an out of range shift
3+|  000       | 1  2+| uimm[6:7] 3+| rd' 5+| uimm[5:0]         2+| 10  | C.LWPC
17+|This encoding space is also available for RV32 only
3+|  100       | 1  | 0  9+|                                    2+| 01  | *reserved*
|=============================================================================================

[#semantics]
.semantics
[width="100%",options=header]
|=======================================================================
|instruction    | definition
| C.POP[.E]     | https://github.com/riscv/riscv-code-size-reduction/blob/master/ISA%20proposals/Huawei/riscv_push_pop_extension_RV32_RV64.adoc[POP registers]
| C.POPRET[.E]  | https://github.com/riscv/riscv-code-size-reduction/blob/master/ISA%20proposals/Huawei/riscv_push_pop_extension_RV32_RV64.adoc[POP registers and return]
| C.PUSH[.E]    | https://github.com/riscv/riscv-code-size-reduction/blob/master/ISA%20proposals/Huawei/riscv_push_pop_extension_RV32_RV64.adoc[PUSH registers]
| C.PUSHZERO[.E]    | https://github.com/riscv/riscv-code-size-reduction/blob/master/ISA%20proposals/Huawei/riscv_push_pop_extension_RV32_RV64.adoc[PUSH registers and ZERO the allocated memory]
| C.ZEXT.B      | rd' = zero_ext(rs1'[ 7:0])
| C.ZEXT.H      | rd' = zero_ext(rs1'[15:0])
| C.SEXT.B      | rd' = sign_ext(rs1'[ 7:0])
| C.SEXT.H      | rd' = sign_ext(rs1'[15:0])
| C.MUL         | rd' = rs1' * rs2'
| C.ORSLL8      | rd' = rs1' \| (rs2'<<8)
| C.ORSLL16     | rd' = rs1' \| (rs2'<<16)
| C.ORSLL24     | rd' = rs1' \| (rs2'<<24)
| C.RORI        | rd' = rotate_right(rs1', shamt)
| C.XORI        | rd' = rs1' ^ sign_ext(imm)
| C.LWPC        | rd' = zero_ext((Memory[PC + sign_ext(imm<<2)])[31:0])
|=======================================================================

`C.ORSLL[8|16|24]` are for loads where the alignment cannot be guaranteed, so the compiler must load one byte at a time and assemble
the result into words. They should not be necessary in this case when `-m-nostrict-align` is specified to GCC. 32-bit encodings are required
as currently no 32-bit version exists.

Also no 32-bit version exists of `C.LWPC`. The idea of `C.LWPC` is to load constant values from the end of the current function, which is 
why the immediate is unsigned.

=== B-extension

Note that the B-extension is required for 32-bit versions of the following instructions:

* `C.ZEXT.H`
* `C.SEXT.B`
* `C.SEXT.H`
* `C.RORI`

For reference the B-extension is proposing the following 16-bit encodings.
Personally I wouldn't allocate 16-bit encodings specifically to RV64, and even less so to RV128

[#b-extension 16-bit encodings]
.b-extension proposed 16-bit encodings
[width="100%",options=header]
|=============================================================================================
| 15 | 14 | 13 | 12 | 11 | 10 | 9 | 8 | 7 | 6  | 5  | 4 | 3 | 2 | 1 | 0 |instruction         
17+|These are taken fromthe B-extension draft specification and are subject to change
3+|  011       |0 2+|00     3+| rs1'/rd'  5+| 00000             2+| 00  | C.NOT
3+|  011       |0 2+|01     3+| rs1'/rd'  5+| 00000             2+| 00  | C.NEG
3+|  011       |0 2+|10     3+| rs1'/rd'  5+| 00000             2+| 00  | C.ZEXT.W (RV64+)
3+|  011       |0 2+|11     3+| rs1'/rd'  5+| 00000             2+| 00  | C.ZEXT.D (RV128)
|=============================================================================================

==== Assembly Examples

[source,sourceCode,text]
----
zext.b a5;              # a5 = zero_ext(a5[7:0])
zext.h a5;              # a5 = zero_ext(a5[15:0])
sext.b a5;              # a5 = sign_ext(a5[7:0])
sext.h a5;              # a5 = sign_ext(a5[15:0])

mul a5, a5, a6;         # a5 = a5 * a6, for 16-bit encoding rd==rs1 and all registers are x8-x15      

orsll8 a5, a5, a6;      # a5 = a5 | (a6<< 8), for 16-bit encoding rd==rs1 and all registers are x8-x15      
orsll16 a5, a5, a6;     # a5 = a5 | (a6<<16), for 16-bit encoding rd==rs1 and all registers are x8-x15      
orsll24 a5, a5, a6;     # a5 = a5 | (a6<<24), for 16-bit encoding rd==rs1 and all registers are x8-x15      

rori a5, a5, 2;         # a5 = rotate_right(a5, 2), for 16-bit encoding rd==rs1, rd=x8-x15      
xori a5, a5, 2;         # a5 = a5 ^ sign-ext(2),    for 16-bit encoding rd==rs1, rd=x8-x15, imm is in the range -4 to +3

lw   a5, 16(pc);        # a5 = zero_extend(Memory[PC + 16<<2)[31:0]), for 16-bit encoding offset must be in range and rd=x8-x15

Commit message:

Add Jim Wilson's load/store alignment comment

ISA proposals/Huawei/16bit_encodings.adoc, after:

= RISC-V 16-bit code-size reduction extension proposal
Version 0.1
:doctype: book
:encoding: utf-8
:lang: en
:toc: left
:toclevels: 4
:numbered:
:xrefstyle: short
:le: &#8804;
:rarr: &#8658;

This document describes 16-bit instructions proposed to help reduce code-size.

== Rational

16-bit instructions are highly valuable for code-size reduction

=== Opcode Assignment

[#proposed-16bit-encodings]
.proposed 16-bit encodings 
[width="100%",options=header]

|=============================================================================================
| 15 | 14 | 13 | 12 | 11 | 10 | 9 | 8 | 7 | 6  | 5  | 4 | 3 | 2 | 1 | 0 |instruction         
17+|PUSH/POP/POPRET specifications are mature
17+|`rcount` must be in the range 0 to 10 to decode as these instructions
3+|  100       | 1  | 1  4+|rcount (0,10) | 0  | 0  3+| spimm   2+| 00  | C.POP[.E]
3+|  100       | 1  | 1  4+|rcount (0,10) | 0  | 1  3+| spimm   2+| 00  | C.POPRET[.E]
3+|  100       | 1  | 1  4+|rcount (0,10) | 1  | 0  3+| spimm   2+| 00  | C.PUSH[.E]
17+|PUSHZERO spec is less mature than PUSH/POP/POPRET and the benefit is lower
3+|  100       | 1  | 1  4+|rcount (0,10) | 1  | 1  3+| spimm   2+| 00  | C.PUSHZERO[.E]             
3+|  100       | 1  | 1  4+| 1011       5+|                     2+| 00  | *reserved*
3+|  100       | 1  | 1  2+| 11 7+|                             2+| 00  | *reserved*
17+|Single source/dest with room for 4 more encodings
3+|  100       | 1  | 0  | 0 3+| rs1'/rd' | 0  | 0  3+| 000     2+| 00  | C.ZEXT.B
3+|  100       | 1  | 0  | 0 3+| rs1'/rd' | 0  | 1  3+| 001     2+| 00  | C.ZEXT.H
3+|  100       | 1  | 0  | 0 3+| rs1'/rd' | 1  | 0  3+| 010     2+| 00  | C.SEXT.B
3+|  100       | 1  | 0  | 0 3+| rs1'/rd' | 1  | 1  3+| 011     2+| 00  | C.SEXT.H
3+|  100       | 1  | 0  | 0 3+|          | 1  | 1    | 1 2+|   2+| 00  | *reserved*
17+|source/dest with one other source operand
3+|  100       | 1  | 0  | 1 3+| rs1'/rd' | 0  | 0  3+| rs2'    2+| 00  | C.MUL
3+|  100       | 1  | 0  | 1 3+| rs1'/rd' | 0  | 1  3+| rs2'    2+| 00  | C.ORSLL8
3+|  100       | 1  | 0  | 1 3+| rs1'/rd' | 1  | 0  3+| rs2'    2+| 00  | C.ORSLL16
3+|  100       | 1  | 0  | 1 3+| rs1'/rd' | 1  | 1  3+| rs2'    2+| 00  | C.ORSLL24
17+|To be useful C.RORI needs a 5-bit immediate, so it may be too expensive to encode, TBD
3+|  100       | 0  | 0  | 0 3+| rs1'/rd' 5+|       shamt       2+| 00  | C.RORI (0-31 places)
3+|  100       | 0  | 0  | 0 3+| rs1'/rd' 2+| 00    3+| imm     2+| 00  | C.XORI (-4 to +3)
3+|  100       | 0  | 0  | 0 3+| rs1'/rd' 2+| > 1   3+| imm     2+| 00  | *reserved*
17+|PC relative load, only available for RV32 as this encoding is C.SLLI with an out of range shift
3+|  000       | 1  2+| uimm[6:7] 3+| rd' 5+| uimm[5:0]         2+| 10  | C.LWPC
17+|This encoding space is also available for RV32 only
3+|  100       | 1  | 0  9+|                                    2+| 01  | *reserved*
|=============================================================================================

[#semantics]
.semantics
[width="100%",options=header]
|=======================================================================
|instruction    | definition
| C.POP[.E]     | https://github.com/riscv/riscv-code-size-reduction/blob/master/ISA%20proposals/Huawei/riscv_push_pop_extension_RV32_RV64.adoc[POP registers]
| C.POPRET[.E]  | https://github.com/riscv/riscv-code-size-reduction/blob/master/ISA%20proposals/Huawei/riscv_push_pop_extension_RV32_RV64.adoc[POP registers and return]
| C.PUSH[.E]    | https://github.com/riscv/riscv-code-size-reduction/blob/master/ISA%20proposals/Huawei/riscv_push_pop_extension_RV32_RV64.adoc[PUSH registers]
| C.PUSHZERO[.E]    | https://github.com/riscv/riscv-code-size-reduction/blob/master/ISA%20proposals/Huawei/riscv_push_pop_extension_RV32_RV64.adoc[PUSH registers and ZERO the allocated memory]
| C.ZEXT.B      | rd' = zero_ext(rs1'[ 7:0])
| C.ZEXT.H      | rd' = zero_ext(rs1'[15:0])
| C.SEXT.B      | rd' = sign_ext(rs1'[ 7:0])
| C.SEXT.H      | rd' = sign_ext(rs1'[15:0])
| C.MUL         | rd' = rs1' * rs2'
| C.ORSLL8      | rd' = rs1' \| (rs2'<<8)
| C.ORSLL16     | rd' = rs1' \| (rs2'<<16)
| C.ORSLL24     | rd' = rs1' \| (rs2'<<24)
| C.RORI        | rd' = rotate_right(rs1', shamt)
| C.XORI        | rd' = rs1' ^ sign_ext(imm)
| C.LWPC        | rd' = zero_ext((Memory[PC + sign_ext(imm<<2)])[31:0])
|=======================================================================

`C.ORSLL[8|16|24]` are for loads where the alignment cannot be guaranteed, so the compiler must load one byte at a time and assemble
the result into words. They should not be necessary in this case when `-m-nostrict-align` is specified to GCC. 32-bit encodings are required
as currently no 32-bit version exists.

*Jim Wilson pointed at that we should fix `-mno-strict-align` and mandate that cores which need `C.ORSLL[8|16|24]` support unaligned load/store so that we don't need the instructions.*


Also no 32-bit version exists of `C.LWPC`. The idea of `C.LWPC` is to load constant values from the end of the current function, which is 
why the immediate is unsigned.

=== B-extension

Note that the B-extension is required for 32-bit versions of the following instructions:

* `C.ZEXT.H`
* `C.SEXT.B`
* `C.SEXT.H`
* `C.RORI`

For reference the B-extension is proposing the following 16-bit encodings.
Personally I wouldn't allocate 16-bit encodings specifically to RV64, and even less so to RV128

[#b-extension 16-bit encodings]
.b-extension proposed 16-bit encodings
[width="100%",options=header]
|=============================================================================================
| 15 | 14 | 13 | 12 | 11 | 10 | 9 | 8 | 7 | 6  | 5  | 4 | 3 | 2 | 1 | 0 |instruction         
17+|These are taken fromthe B-extension draft specification and are subject to change
3+|  011       |0 2+|00     3+| rs1'/rd'  5+| 00000             2+| 00  | C.NOT
3+|  011       |0 2+|01     3+| rs1'/rd'  5+| 00000             2+| 00  | C.NEG
3+|  011       |0 2+|10     3+| rs1'/rd'  5+| 00000             2+| 00  | C.ZEXT.W (RV64+)
3+|  011       |0 2+|11     3+| rs1'/rd'  5+| 00000             2+| 00  | C.ZEXT.D (RV128)
|=============================================================================================

==== Assembly Examples

[source,sourceCode,text]
----
zext.b a5;              # a5 = zero_ext(a5[7:0])
zext.h a5;              # a5 = zero_ext(a5[15:0])
sext.b a5;              # a5 = sign_ext(a5[7:0])
sext.h a5;              # a5 = sign_ext(a5[15:0])

mul a5, a5, a6;         # a5 = a5 * a6, for 16-bit encoding rd==rs1 and all registers are x8-x15      

orsll8 a5, a5, a6;      # a5 = a5 | (a6<< 8), for 16-bit encoding rd==rs1 and all registers are x8-x15      
orsll16 a5, a5, a6;     # a5 = a5 | (a6<<16), for 16-bit encoding rd==rs1 and all registers are x8-x15      
orsll24 a5, a5, a6;     # a5 = a5 | (a6<<24), for 16-bit encoding rd==rs1 and all registers are x8-x15      

rori a5, a5, 2;         # a5 = rotate_right(a5, 2), for 16-bit encoding rd==rs1, rd=x8-x15      
xori a5, a5, 2;         # a5 = a5 ^ sign-ext(2),    for 16-bit encoding rd==rs1, rd=x8-x15, imm is in the range -4 to +3

lw   a5, 16(pc);        # a5 = zero_extend(Memory[PC + 16<<2)[31:0]), for 16-bit encoding offset must be in range and rd=x8-x15
